From The New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is The Daily. [music]
>> [music]
>> Over the weekend, we heard one message
after another message about how a peace
deal [music] with Iran was coming.
The framework was in place, we were
told, and we were on the verge of it.
And then suddenly, there was a new round
of air strikes and threats.
And so today, [music]
I talked to my colleagues David Sanger
and Tyler Pager about what happened and
how to make sense [music] of this
dramatic reversal.
It's Wednesday, May 27th.
David, Tyler, welcome to The Daily.
Thanks, Rachel. Great to be here. Thanks
for having us. It's very exciting to
talk to both of you at the same time in
the DC studio. You've been working
furiously over a very long holiday
weekend that I think a lot of people
went into
with some sense that there might be a
deal to end the war with Iran.
And then
we all went off to our weekends, not you
two, of course, but we come back and on
Tuesday, not only is there no deal to
end the war, but the United States, we
learned, struck a bunch of targets in
Iran on Monday night. So, I think a lot
of people are confused about the state
of play and want to understand how did
we go from a feeling that something
might be imminent to where we are today,
Tuesday afternoon. Tyler, you were with
the president all weekend. Why don't we
start with you?
Yeah, so we set out with this weekend
thinking that there would be some
significant development with the
conflict with Iran. And really, it could
have gone either way. That there was
serious progress toward an agreement or
a resumption of military action.
>> Mhm. So, kind of two ends of the
spectrum.
>> Exactly.
>> [music]
>> So, on Friday, I was part of the
traveling pool of reporters with the
president and we had expected to travel
to New York for a political event with
Congressman [music] Mike Lawler and then
continue on to Bedminster, New Jersey
where the president was expected to
spend the weekend at his golf club as he
does many spring and summer weekends.
So early Friday morning I drop off my
suitcase at the White House and come
back around noon
and just before we leave we're told the
president will be returning to
Washington [music]
directly and he will not be spending the
weekend at his
golf club in New Jersey. Or at his son's
Don Jr's wedding in the Bahamas. I think
that's when a lot of people realized
that there might be something going on
this weekend when Trump announced that
he was quite busy and might not be able
to make it. Correct. [music] So he was
doing neither of those two things, he
was coming back to the White House. And
they didn't explicitly give us a reason
and at that moment I asked a White House
official
what should we expect for this [music]
weekend? And the White House official
told me 50/50.
50/50 we're restarting the war, 50/50 we
have a nuclear deal or at least progress
toward that.
So on Saturday morning the president
posts on Truth Social about a call he
had just had with a collection of
leaders from the Arab world to discuss a
peace deal that they are encouraging him
to take and he strikes quite an
optimistic tone
about what
is developing. He says if I recall
correctly that the final details of a
deal are being discussed, they're going
to be announced shortly.
Yeah and he doesn't give a lot of
details. All that he says is in addition
to many other elements of the agreement,
the Strait of Hormuz will be opened.
>> Mhm. And can I just pause here because
at this point I think people might be a
little bit confused what we're talking
about when we say a deal, when we refer
to Trump saying a deal is going to be
announced. David, when it comes to Iran,
what are we talking about exactly when
we say deal?
Well, the president uses that phrase,
obviously, to cover a wide range of
things.
But, he wasn't talking about a nuclear
deal.
He wasn't talking about a missile deal.
Mhm. He wasn't talking about a deal that
would actually get to any of the
substantive issues that led him to
attack Iran along with Israel joining in
with him on February 28th. What he was
talking about, really, was a sort of
memorandum of understanding, to put it
in the real estate business terms.
Right, business terms of Donald Trump.
That basically said that they would
reopen the Strait of Hormuz, a process
that would probably take 30 days or so
by the time you demine it and figure it
out.
And then, use the time
Secretary of State Rubio said up to 60
days to negotiate on the real issues of
substance.
So,
this deal was really just a way to get
back to the status quo
at the time the war started. Not really
to go solve any of the fundamental
questions. Can you just explain that a
little bit? When you say status quo,
remind us sort of what the state of play
was when this war started. Well, when
the war started, there was free commerce
rolling through the Strait of Hormuz.
The closing of the strait was a result
of the war. It was not a cause of the
war.
The Iranians had never closed the strait
before. And what did they discover,
Rachel? They discovered this was an
enormously powerful weapon that they had
that they had never flexed before.
Leverage. They discovered that they had
massive leverage.
>> They discovered that even facing the
world's biggest military force,
one they clearly couldn't compete with
on the battlefield,
they had an enormous ability to disrupt
the world economy. Mhm. And this has
been the largest disruption of energy
supply in modern history. So, suddenly
the question came,
why would they reopen this in a deal
with the president over the weekend? And
the answer is that really both sides are
suffering right now. The Iranians are
suffering because the president imposed
a blockade
that kept ships from going in and out of
Iranian ports.
And the US was suffering because gas
prices have gone so high. And so this
deal is really just about opening the
strait again, getting the oil flowing,
bringing down the gas prices.
It kicks down the road all of the harder
issues about Iran's nuclear program,
their missile program,
that the president was saying until last
week had to be resolved in this
negotiation.
And now what they're saying is, now on
second thought, let's get the oil
flowing again and we'll worry about that
all later.
I I want to pause here, David, cuz I
want to remind people where we are in
the story of the US versus Iran's
nuclear program, which you mentioned is
one of the issues at hand here. People
might remember that last summer the
administration said that the United
States had destroyed Iran's nuclear
program. That's obviously not the case
as we see now. So, what is each side
asking for as it relates to the Iranian
nuclear program?
So, his phrase was that the US had
obliterated it and that made you think
that it was gone forever. What he really
did was bury it. The United States sent
B-2 bombers in June of 2025.
They used deep penetrating bombs to hit
three major nuclear sites.
And from all accounts we've gotten
since, they did a pretty good job. They
collapsed
those sites and including one in Isfahan
where there are 970 lb
of highly enriched uranium. This is the
stuff that in a few days or a few weeks
you could turn into the kind of fuel you
would use in a nuclear weapon. It would
take you longer to build the weapon
itself.
So, what do they want? The US wants to
get that near-bomb grade uranium out of
the country. They have to dig it up and
give it up. That's right. So,
the Iranians, of course, say, "Hey,
look, it's our right as a signatory of
the nuclear nonproliferation treaty
to produce nuclear fuel. So, we don't
want to give up everything." So, there's
been a lot of back and forth on that
issue.
And the arguments over the weekend were
highly focused on just that wording.
Well, let's talk about those arguments,
Tyler.
As these updates are trickling out, what
kinds of reactions are you seeing and
what are these arguments over
specifically?
Yeah, I mean, this is getting right at
the heart of what has been dividing much
of Trump's base since the war began,
which is those who think Trump should
continue bombing Iran and in their
parlance finish the job and those who
are
opposed to the war and see the economic
costs of it and worried about the
politics of the war and want Trump to
figure out a way out. So, for those who
want the war to continue, those
so-called Iran hawks, I think we hit a
wall on deal making. Like Senator
Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, a
close ally of President Trump, are quite
concerned about the contours of the
deal. hurt them more, maybe they'll make
a deal if you hurt them enough. But
right now, I think they're trying to
wait us out. I think they're playing
games. And in the words of the
president, I think they're crazy. I
think he's right. He was quite worried
that Iran was playing the United States
and delaying
negotiations over the most contentious
issues in a way that would just kick the
can down the road and be detrimental to
the United States and to the region more
broadly. Mhm.
There were other Republicans similarly
raising concerns. There were Israelis
who are raising concerns. They fear that
the outlines of this deal
is problematic and that Trump should not
let up on the military action until he
gets more concessions. Mhm. There are
many in the president's coalition who do
not think the war is won yet and any
negotiated settlement is too soon. Mhm.
You know what's What's interesting when
you talk to those in the Republican
Party, including like Roger Wicker, the
head of the Senate Armed Services
Committee,
who have been arguing for finishing the
job, it's essentially an acknowledgement
that the president has achieved none of
the political objectives that he laid
out in the opening hours of the war.
And they don't want to go back to a
situation where you might get the strait
opened, although there'll be some degree
of Iranian control, presumably,
but you still have a nuclear program,
you still have a missile program,
and that the president fundamentally
will have conducted 38 days of combat
operations
and have nothing to show for it from his
original objectives. And when I asked
the president about this on the way back
from China, You did it for 38 days.
>> Well, no, we did And you did not get the
political changes in Iran. Well, I got I
I had a total military victory. And but
the fake news, guys like you write
incorrectly. You're a fake guy. That's
when he blew up at me and described the
New York Times' coverage as treasonous.
I actually think it's sort of some
treasonous what you write, but you and
the New York Times and CNN I would say
are the worst. I believe he called you
treasonous. He did and the Times. We
both got to share in it.
Yeah, you're but somebody's feeding you
You're Your editors tell you what to
write then and you write it. You should
be ashamed of this.
>> [music]
>> It's really fascinating cuz it tells you
how sensitive he is on this
subject because I think he fears
>> [music]
>> if the history of this war is written,
if we're in a situation where Iran has
once again
managed to drag this out and hold on to
a threshold capability to build a bomb,
he will have failed.
Which is why I think you've seen,
Rachel, that in the last couple of days
he's started to take a very different
tone.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
So, Tyler, as David mentioned, the
president's tone seems to shift over the
weekend. So, walk us through that shift
and why it happened.
Yes, so the president is a voracious
consumer of media and is clearly aware
of the criticism from some of his own
allies and supporters about the status
of the negotiations and the progress
toward a deal that they are not happy
with.
>> Mhm. And so on Sunday morning, the White
House organizes a call with a senior US
official to walk reporters through
what's actually in the deal.
What's interesting is the official, who
only spoke on the condition of
background to discuss the negotiations,
really just goes on a rant uninterrupted
for quite some time, blaming the media.
And I'm sorry, blaming the media for
what exactly? What are they saying that
you guys are getting wrong?
They're saying that the media is
reporting things that are inaccurate
from various officials in Iran or in the
Arab world who are trying to tank the
deal for any number of reasons and
saying that the US media is not
reporting accurately on the progress the
negotiators are making. Got it. Okay, so
what happens next?
So then the official starts to walk
through what's actually in the deal and
in fact we learn
that there's not a whole lot that's been
agreed upon. The official makes it very
clear that there's no deal that's going
to be signed that day or even in the
next few days, talking about how
difficult it is to reach the supreme
leader because he's in hiding and that
they need his sign-off, but there wasn't
even a document at that point Sunday
morning for the supreme leader to sign.
>> Mhm. And another important thing that
the official reveals on this call is
that one of the most important sticking
points for the US, which is the disposal
of this highly enriched uranium, there
was no agreed upon mechanism by which
that would be disposed of, whether the
US would take it, whether the Iranians
would give it to a third party, whether
the Iranians would destroy it in the
presence of
international observers.
Key questions about a key part of this
memorandum of understanding had not yet
been figured out, let alone all the
other contentious issues that were being
punted down the road. So, basically,
despite what the president has posted
online just a few days ago, there is no
imminent deal to end the war.
Right. And the president then starts
lashing out at his critics on Sunday
afternoon on Truth Social, where he
says, "Don't listen to the losers who
are critical about something they know
nothing about." And says it isn't even
fully negotiated yet. So, both conceding
that they're still working through the
negotiations and hitting back at critics
who are concerned about the direction in
which these negotiations are headed.
>> Mhm. And Trump adds a whole 'nother
wrinkle to these already complicated
negotiations. On Monday morning, the
president says that he's mandatorily
requesting that all countries
immediately sign the Abraham Accords.
So, these agreements that started in the
president's first term in which several
Arab countries signed on to normalize
diplomatic relations with Israel. But,
in this particular moment, it throws a
wrench into already complicated
negotiations between several Arab
countries, the United States, and Iran.
And the president is asking Arab
countries like Saudi Arabia, Pakistan,
Turkey, Egypt, Jordan to sign on to
these agreements
that many of them have no interest in
doing, and others that were in
conversations about signing them in
earlier phases lost interest after
October 7th and Israel's response in
Gaza. So, this is basically a
non-starter.
For many of these countries, but for
Trump, it serves two purposes. One, it
is helping to mollify some of his
Republican critics like Lindsey Graham
who see this as a way to get out of the
war and remake the Middle East. And for
Trump, it is a way to try to suggest
that he has this grander project at hand
to remake the Middle East in the
aftermath of this war.
So, just going back to our timeline, I
think at this point in the storytelling,
it is Monday evening, and word comes out
that not only is there no deal, but that
the United States has actually launched
strikes against targets in Iran.
This feels like it comes out of nowhere,
perhaps, given the fact that we've been
hearing about deal making all weekend.
So, David, where do these strikes fit
into the negotiations?
Well, first, Rachel, it certainly
illustrates how fragile this ceasefire
is. And
there's a fair bit of evidence that what
the military was doing was sending a
reminder to the Iranians
that if the deal doesn't come together,
and even if it does, they expect a
certain level of behavior
in the strait. Now, in this case, the
military tells us they'd seen three
things. They had seen some activity
around missile sites that could be a
threat to American ships that are just
offshore in the strait. They'd seen a
fair bit of drone activity being
conducted there.
And they had also seen some laying of
mines, or what they thought was laying
of mines from small boats
that the Iranians controlled. So, they
blew some of these up. And then they
went away, and they carefully referred
to it as a self-defense action.
Now, whether the Iranians viewed it that
way, we don't know, but it tells you
that this is all at a pretty delicate
moment where there is a strange mix of
incentive and force to try to get the
agreement.
>> We're negotiating with you, but this is
a reminder to do what we want, or else,
and also it was all defensive, so we can
keep negotiating. That's right.
I I think it is fair to say that at this
point there is a collective sense of
whiplash after several days of news
about deal being on, deal being off,
strikes happening. Tyler and I certainly
feel that. That makes sense given that
you guys were probably more meshed in it
than most other people. Tyler, do we
have any sense at this point on Tuesday
afternoon of what our timeline looks
like? Like are we close to having an
answer one way or another about whether
there will be a deal or as you said a
resumption of full-blown war? It seems
right now the Trump administration wants
to continue to give diplomacy a chance
to end this conflict. But it doesn't
seem that's going to happen imminently.
Secretary of State Marco Rubio, who was
traveling back from India, told
reporters that it could take a few more
days to finalize the deal.
It seems the administration is willing
to give the mediating partners Qatar,
Pakistan, and other Arab countries a few
more days and hopefully in their view
wrap up the conflict.
I want to pull back just for a second
here and talk more broadly about the way
that this administration approaches deal
making when it comes to war.
Right now when it comes to Iran the most
urgent issues as you have explained are
reopening the strait and some kind of
ceasefire, but again there are these
bigger issues that seem to be getting
punted. And that sounds a lot like the
kind of phase deal making that we saw
with Gaza where the easiest things were
negotiated up front and then the more
difficult things like disarming Hamas
and rebuilding Gaza and whether there
would be a Palestinian state, all of
those things remain unresolved months
and months later. So I guess what I'm
getting at is that even if a deal is
announced and the war with Iran that if
it kicks a bunch of cans down the road,
how much stock should we put into any
such announcement?
I think you have to be pretty skeptical.
I mean, Rachel, you and I were both in
Israel
during the time period when the
agreement was announced with Hamas.
>> That's right.
>> And the president at the time said,
"Well, in just a few weeks
Hamas will disarm
and we'll have a full agreement and
we'll start rebuilding Gaza. And as you
suggested, none of that has happened
yet.
>> Mhm. So, imagine a world now where you
move forward to the Iran deal. It was
only 11 weeks ago that the president
said, "This war ends only one way, with
Iran's unconditional surrender." He has
now moved toward, "Well, maybe we can
get a deal to reopen the strait, which
was open the day the war started."
Right. And then resume negotiations,
which were underway before the war
started. The goal posts keep moving, I
think is what you're saying. Yeah, they
do keep moving.
And you know, I've covered Iranian
negotiations, mostly on the nuclear
program, for 20 years, and they are
masters of dragging this out. The deal
with President Obama, whether you liked
it or hated it, took 2 years to
negotiate. Mhm. And I think the Iranians
are looking at President Trump and
saying, "Look, this is all part of a
47-year long conflict with the United
States. If we can wait Donald Trump out
for
2 and 1/2 years here,
we're on to the next president, and all
we need to do is be able to hold on to
enough of our nuclear capability in that
interim that we can then figure out what
to do with it next."
You know, I think by now in Trump's
second term, we have seen this playbook
from the president a number of times,
where basically it feels as though he
announces a deal in order to claim a
victory, but the details haven't quite
been worked out yet, and perhaps there's
hope from the administration that by the
time the deal doesn't quite look like
what was announced, people might not be
paying a lot of attention. But,
with this war specifically,
I think that for most Americans, the
number one thing they care about is gas
prices. And so, Tyler, I wonder if gas
prices don't go down, will that tactic
of announcing something and hoping
people don't pay enough attention
actually work.
It's very unlikely and we know that
Republicans in the White House, on
Capitol Hill, and around the country are
deeply concerned about how these high
gas prices are going to hurt them when
voters go to the ballot box in November
for the midterm elections. And so,
if this strait is not reopened soon,
we could see gas prices eclipsing $5 a
gallon.
And that is an extremely dangerous
position for Republicans to be in
in a competitive midterm election cycle.
And so, there is a lot of pressure for
the president to get this strait
reopened.
Unlike other conflicts that don't affect
Americans on a daily basis, this one
does. [music]
>> [music]
>> David, [music] Tyler, thank you so much.
Thank you. Thank you.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right [music] back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
[music]
On Tuesday, Ken Paxton, the Texas
Attorney General who received President
Trump's endorsement last week, won the
Republican primary for Senate,
>> [music]
>> scrambling the upcoming midterm battle
in the state.
Paxton, who had been marred [music] by
scandals including an impeachment 3
years ago, defeated Senator John Cornyn,
a [music] four-term Republican who had
not faced a close general election in
his more than 20 years in the Senate.
Tonight
we just made history.
In his victory speech,
>> [music]
>> Paxton thanked the president for backing
him over the objections of most other
Republicans. When everyone in Washington
told him to abandon me and abandon the
people of Texas, he didn't listen.
Instead, he gave his complete and total
endorsement.
Cornyn
who had called Paxton an embarrassment,
said he would back [music] him in
November. I've said throughout this race
that I trust the voters
of Texas.
And they've made their decision and I
must respect it.
Paxton will face [music] off against
Democrat James Talarico, a race that
could affect control of the United
States Senate.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode [music] was produced by
Claire Teggert and Jessica Chung. It was
edited by Michael Benoist [music] and
Patricia Willens and contains music by
Marion Lozano.
Our theme music is by Wonderly and this
episode was engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
[music]
>> [music]
>> That's it for the daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.